add blogpost (#1994)
galaxyproject/galaxy-hub: content/news/2023-05-08-tpv-switch/index.md

---
title: "Job router switch on EU"
date: "2023-05-08"
tease: "Mothballing the Sorting Hat – how we migrated our dynamic job routing"
hide_tease: false
authors: 'Mira Kuntz, Helena Rasche'
authors_structured:
- github: mira-miracoli
- github: hexylena
tags: [EU]
subsites: [all-eu]
main_subsite: eu
---

# Mothballing the Sorting Hat

## An old hat

> usegalaxy.eu runs more than 1 mio jobs per month. All these jobs have different demands and use different resources and technologies, like Docker, Apptainer etc., which need all sorts of parameters and environment variables. Galaxy handles jobs with resource managers like SLURM, HTCondor or the remote job execution system Pulsar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
usegalaxy.eu runs more than 1 million jobs per month. All these jobs have different demands and use different resources and technologies, like Docker, Apptainer etc., which need all sorts of parameters and environment variables. Galaxy handles jobs with resource managers like SLURM, HTCondor or the remote job execution system Pulsar.
```

But how do these resource managers know which resources each individual job needs?  

> You could now specify that for every single tool, but as you can guess, with over 8.000 tools and many different possibilities to compute a job, this approach leads to chaotic unmaintainable static lists.

Reviewer: I assume this should be localised differently?
```suggestion
You could now specify that for every single tool, but as you can guess, with over 8,000 tools and many different possibilities to compute a job, this approach leads to chaotic unmaintainable static lists.
```

Author: ah yes, I wrote it the German way

In order to determine job execution parameters at runtime and based on factors such as the job inputs,  the user submitting the job, cluster status, etc, we needed a different approach.  
Galaxy lets you do that with [`Dynamic Destination Mapping`](https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/latest/admin/jobs.html#dynamic-destination-mapping).
In the past we used this approach with our own python script, which was called [`Sorting Hat`](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/sorting-hat).  
This python script dynamically modified destinations based on rules that evaluate the specific job characteristics, for example the dataset input size.
This allows you to allocate more memory for your job based on the input file size.  
In light of J.K. Rowling's controversial personal views and statements, we would certainly have chosen the name differently today.  

## Why change a running system?

> So far so good – this python script did it’s job well for some years, but also came with limits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far so good – this python script did its job well for some years, but also came with some limitations.
```

## The Total Perspective Vortex
Galaxy Australia came up with a more sophisticated approach that is available as a [PyPi package](https://pypi.org/galaxyproject/total-perspective-vortex) and lets you define tags and rules on all entities, like users, roles, tools and destinations. These tags can be specified as accepted, preferred, required and rejected. Inheritance makes it easy to give tags for example to groups of tools like tools that need to run in Docker. During the matching process all tags from the job-side (user, role, tool) and from the destination-side are evaluated.
And because it evaluates really everything it was named [`Total Perspective Vortex`](https://total-perspective-vortex.readthedocs.io) (TPV) after Douglas Adams’ _The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy_.  
With all that functionality, TPV is not tied to a specific Galaxy instance, but rather is a generalized and flexible approach that fits all needs.

> With the help of Galaxy Australia's admin Catherine Broomhead, we managed to migrate our Galaxy instance from Sorting Hat to TPV last week. Despite minor scheduling issues that affected mainly Docker tools, we can consider this migration smooth and user friendly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the help of Galaxy Australia's admin Catherine Bromhead, we managed to migrate our Galaxy instance from Sorting Hat to TPV last week. Despite minor scheduling issues that affected mainly Docker tools, we can consider this migration smooth and user friendly.
```

---

> title: "Job router switch on EU"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Replacing the Job Router with Zero Downtime on EU"
```

since it was done without downtime y'all should be proud of that, but on the other hand I guess it's not really mentioned how that happened, so maybe feel free to reject this change for that reason.

Reviewer 2: Alternatively: "We Rebuilt the Engine while the Plane was Flying: Job Router switch with Zero Downtime on EU"

Galaxy Australia came up with a more sophisticated approach that is available as a [PyPi package](https://pypi.org/galaxyproject/total-perspective-vortex) and lets you define tags and rules on all entities, like users, roles, tools and destinations. These tags can be specified as accepted, preferred, required and rejected. Inheritance makes it easy to give tags for example to groups of tools like tools that need to run in Docker. During the matching process all tags from the job-side (user, role, tool) and from the destination-side are evaluated.
And because it evaluates really everything it was named [`Total Perspective Vortex`](https://total-perspective-vortex.readthedocs.io) (TPV) after Douglas Adams’ _The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy_.

With all that functionality, TPV is not tied to a specific Galaxy instance, but rather is a generalized and flexible approach that fits all needs.
With the help of Galaxy Australia's admin Catherine Bromhead, we managed to migrate our Galaxy instance from Sorting Hat to TPV last week. Despite minor scheduling issues that affected mainly Docker tools, we can consider this migration smooth and user friendly.

## How can you contribute?

> TPV makes use of a [shared library](https://github.com/galaxyproject/tpv-shared-database) that is maintained in GitHub, making it easy for everyone in the community to contribute. This library defines resources and parameters that are valid across all Galaxy instances. You can install TPV to your machine and `format`, `lint` and even `dry-run` the configuration, before deploying in production. Once the tests are passing, the pull request gets accepted and all Galaxy servers that are using the shared library will automatically fetch the updated rules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TPV makes use of a [shared library](https://github.com/galaxyproject/tpv-shared-database) that is maintained in GitHub, making it easy for everyone in the community to contribute. This library defines resources and parameters that are valid across all Galaxy instances. You can install TPV to your machine and `format`, `lint` and even `dry-run` the configuration, before deploying in production. Once the tests are passing, the pull request gets accepted and all Galaxy servers that are using the shared library will automatically fetch the updated rules the next time those Galaxies restart.
```
